{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\f0\fs28\lang9 Describe yourself\par
\b0 I am Uditha Sampath Kariyawasam and I'm excited to have the opportunity to tell you a bit about myself . I am 25 years old and My home town is Bandarawela. Currently I am working at Codegen as an Associate Systems Administrator. I hold a degree in Computer Systems and Networking degree from SLIIT, and I've the experions more than one and half years in Systems administration industry. In my previose role my responsibilities revolved around ensuring the smooth operation of the entire company's computer systems and networks. Also I provide the IT support to all other partner company Vega Innovations, ChargeNET, CodeGen Sustainable Solutions.While my experience in Systems Administration has been enriching, my true passion lies in the feild of DevOps. \par
\b\par
what you have done at codegen as a Associate systems administrator. (Write a short paragraph answer for this devops interview question) \par
\b0 As an Associate Systems Administrator at CodeGen, my responsibilities revolved around ensuring the smooth operation of the company's computer systems and networks. I actively monitored system performance, promptly addressed issues, and performed routine maintenance tasks. I provided technical support to users, troubleshooting hardware and software problems to maintain productivity. Also I participated in system upgrades and new software deployments, and documenting procedures. Overall, my contributions as an Associate Systems Administrator at CodeGen focused on system monitoring, user support, security management, and collaboration with the IT team.\b\par
How is your associate systems administrator experience connect to devops engineer position? (Write a short paragraph answer for this devops interview question) \par
\b0 My experience as an Associate Systems Administrator connects well with the role of a Associate DevOps Engineer. As an Associate Systems Administrator, I gained valuable knowledge and hands-on experience in system monitoring, maintenance, troubleshooting, and user support. These skills are crucial in the DevOps field, as DevOps Engineers need to monitor and maintain the infrastructure and ensure its smooth operation. Additionally, my involvement in system upgrades and deployments aligns with the DevOps principle of continuous integration and delivery, where automation process play an important role. Moreover, my understanding of security and access management contributes to the DevOps focus on implementing secure and scalable systems. Overall, my experience as an Associate Systems Administrator provides a strong foundation for transitioning into this DevOps Engineer role, where I can further enhance my skills in automation, deployment, and continuous improvement of software delivery processes.\par
\par
\b write a short interview answer to why are you change the department Systems administration into devops. write about your passion and skills  (100 words)\par
\b0 Transitioning from Systems Administration to DevOps aligns perfectly with my passion for innovation and continuous improvement in IT operations. My  experience in Systems Administration has honed my skills in managing infrastructure and ensuring system stability. However, I have always been drawn to the DevOps philosophy, which emphasizes automation, collaboration, and efficient software delivery. My technical skills, coupled with my passion to adopt new tools and methodologies, make me confident in my ability to excellent in a DevOps role. I am thrilled to leverage my passion and skills to bridge the gap between development and operations, driving impactful changes and optimizing the organization's overall performance.\par
\par
\b What is Devops?\b0\par
DevOps is a set of practices that combines software development (Dev) and IT operations (Ops) to shorten the systems development life cycle and provide continuous delivery with high quality. DevOps emphasizes the importance of communication, collaboration, and automation between these two teams.\par
There are some of the benefits of DevOps\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Increased speed and agility in software delivery\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Improved quality and reliability of software\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Reduced costs\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Increased customer satisfaction\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
What is CI/CD?\par
\b0 CI/CD, or Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment, is a software development approach that automates the process of integrating code changes into a shared repository (CI) and deploying them to production environments (CD). It ensures frequent code integration, automated testing, and faster, more reliable software delivery. Embracing CI/CD enhances collaboration, accelerates development cycles, and enables organizations to deliver high-quality software to users with greater speed and efficiency.\par
\par
\b How to intregrate the Continuous integration, deployment and testing to a pipelines. (100 words)\par
\b0 Integrating Continuous Integration (CI), Continuous Deployment (CD), and testing into a pipeline involves automating the software development process. Start by using version control to manage code changes. Set up a CI server like Jenkins or GitLab CI/CD to monitor the repository for changes and trigger automatic builds. Implement automated tests (unit, integration, etc.) in the CI stage to validate code quality. Generate deployable artifacts after successful testing. Create CD stages for different environments and automate the deployment process. Implement monitoring and notifications for feedback. Regularly review and improve the pipeline to ensure a seamless and efficient software delivery lifecycle.\par
\b\fs48 AWS\fs28\par
Pricing Method in AWS EC2\par

\pard{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf1\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0 On-Demand Instances\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Reserved Instances (RIs)\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Savings Plans\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Spot Instances\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Dedicated Hosts\par
{\pntext\f1\'B7\tab}Dedicated Instances\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b What you can do in AWS?\par
Create a Server (EC2 instance)\par

\pard 
{\pntext\f0 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf0\pnindent0\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0 Sign in to the AWS Management Console\par
{\pntext\f0 2.\tab}Navigate to EC2 Dashboard\par
{\pntext\f0 3.\tab}Launch Instance\par
{\pntext\f0 4.\tab}Choose an Amazon Machine Image (AMI)\par
{\pntext\f0 5.\tab}Choose an Instance Type\par
{\pntext\f0 6.\tab}Configure Instance (VPC, subnet)\par
{\pntext\f0 7.\tab}Add Storage\par
{\pntext\f0 8.\tab}Configure Security Group for loadbalancer (firewall to control inbound and outbound traffic)\par
{\pntext\f0 9.\tab}Configure load balancer\line Choose the load balancer type (Application or Network).\line Configure the listener settings (port and protocol).\line Configure security settings (choose the security group you created).\line Configure routing (target groups).\line Choose instances to register with the load balancer (existing instances or create new instances).\line\par
{\pntext\f0 10.\tab}Review and create load balancer\par
{\pntext\f0 11.\tab}Review Instance Launch\par
{\pntext\f0 12.\tab}Launch Instance\par
{\pntext\f0 13.\tab}Choose an Existing Key Pair or Create a New One\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Setup an S3 Bucket\par
Set Up a Simple Database\par
Monitor Resources with CloudWatch\par

\pard 
{\pntext\f0 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf0\pnindent0\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-360\li1440\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0 Amazon CloudWatch\par
{\pntext\f0 2.\tab}Amazon CloudWatch Logs\par
{\pntext\f0 3.\tab}Amazon CloudWatch Alarms\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Set Up a Virtual Private Cloud (VPC)\par
Create a Load Balancer\par
Configure IAM Permissions\par
Backup and Restore a Database\par

\pard 
{\pntext\f0 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf0\pnindent0\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0 Amazon EBS Snapshots (for EC2 Instances): take snapshots of Amazon Elastic Block Store (EBS) volumes\par
{\pntext\f0 2.\tab}Amazon RDS Automated Backups (for Databases): can enable automated backups. Amazon RDS automatically backs up the database and transaction logs according to retention settings. Also can create manual snapshots for additional backups. Also can use utilities or commands,\line Mysql ---> mysqldump command\line Microsoft SQL ---> SQL server management studio\par
{\pntext\f0 3.\tab}Amazon S3 Versioning (for Object Storage): Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) offers versioning, which allows you to preserve, retrieve, and restore every version of every object stored in an S3 bucket. \par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b How to get the data stored on a EC2 who's SSH key is lost? write short answer step by step.\par
\b0\par

\pard 
{\pntext\f0 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf0\pnindent0\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Create a new EC2 instance with a new SSH key.\par
{\pntext\f0 2.\tab}Stop the old EC2 instance\par
{\pntext\f0 3.\tab}Detach the root volume from the old EC2 instance.\par
{\pntext\f0 4.\tab}Attach the root volume to the new EC2 instance.\par
{\pntext\f0 5.\tab}SSH into the new EC2 instance using the new SSH key.\par
{\pntext\f0 6.\tab}Mount the attached volume to the new EC2 instance.\par
{\pntext\f0 7.\tab}Access the mounted volume to retrieve the data from the old EC2 instance.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b what is the best practice to create an IAM in AWS. write a short interview answer in step by step. \par

\pard 
{\pntext\f0 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf0\pnindent0\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0 Assign the user to specific IAM groups based on their role.\par
{\pntext\f0 2.\tab}Enable Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA) for added security.\par
{\pntext\f0 3.\tab}Set a strong password policy for their account.\par
{\pntext\f0 4.\tab}Review and grant minimal necessary permissions following the principle of least privilege.\par
{\pntext\f0 5.\tab}use IAM roles for applications to avoid direct access keys.\par
{\pntext\f0 6.\tab}Create the user, and they will receive login details via email.\b\par
{\pntext\f0 7.\tab}\b0 Regularly review and optimize user permissions using IAM Access Advisor.\b\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Explain backup & dissaster recovery\par
\b0 backup focuses on creating copies of data to prevent data loss and aid in the recovery of individual files, while disaster recovery involves comprehensive planning to restore an entire IT environment after a major incident to minimize downtime and ensure the continued operation of the business.\par
\par
\b\fs48 Linux\b0\fs28\par
\b Linux Command\b0\par
pwd: It displays the path of the present working directory.\par
ls: Lists all the directories and files in the present working directory.\par
cd: It is used for changing the present working directory.\par
rmdir: It deletes a directory.\par
mkdir: It is used to create a new directory.\par
\par
\b What command would you use to find out how much memory Linux is using?\b0\par
The following are the commands that you can use:\par
vmstat\par
htop\par
top\par
free-m\par
\b\par
How to Check Memory Usage in Linux, 5 Simple Commands\b0\par
cat Command to Show Linux Memory Information.\par
free Command to Display the Amount of Physical and Swap Memory.\par
vmstat Command to Report Virtual Memory Statistics.\par
top Command to Check Memory Use.\par
htop Comm b and to Find Memory Load of Each Process (CPU Usage).\par
df -h displays information about total space and available space on a file system\par
\b\par
what is a zombie process and how would you find one. write step by step shortly. no need to describe.\par

\pard 
{\pntext\f0 1.\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlbody\pnf0\pnindent0\pnstart1\pndec{\pntxta.}}
\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0 Use the command "\b ps -ef | grep defunct\b0 " or "\b ps aux | grep defunct\b0 " to find zombie processes.\par
{\pntext\f0 2.\tab}The output will display any zombie processes with the status "Z" or "defunct."\par
{\pntext\f0 3.\tab}Identify the PID (Process ID) of the zombie process from the output.\par
{\pntext\f0 4.\tab}To remove the zombie process entry, restart the parent process or reboot the system.\b\par
}
 